hi everyone Dr Mark eatonson here
specializing in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and Related
Disorders and today I wanted to make a
short video discussing the phenomenon of
gaslighting this is something that's
often discussed on the internet often in
the same breath as the topic of
narcissism and it's often characterized
as something that the narcissist does
sort of uh
consciously that it's a nefarious
attempt to
destabilize another person by
undermining their faith or trust in
their own ability to perceive reality
correctly in order to give the
narcissist an upper hand and make it so
that they can more effectively
manipulate or coerce or abuse the other
person and I want to be clear that you
know I think that sometimes that's true
I think that sometimes for some people
gaslighting is a conscious intentional
attempt to manipulate somebody else but
I think that when it comes to
personality disorders it's often a
byproduct of how that person is
organized psychologically in other words
that gaslighting is something that sort
of happens and it happens unconsciously
it's not necessarily intentional and
here's what I mean by that
people with personality disorders are
operating in what we would call the
borderline range of Personality
organization and that means that they're
having difficulty perceiving and sort of
holding the boundaries between
themselves and other people and also
that they have difficulty accepting the
reality of the consequences for their
actions they have difficulty
understanding that that consequences
can't just sort of be magically undone
so first blurry boundaries between self
and other this means that people with
NPD will often assume that other people
have feelings and intentions that
correspond with their own feelings and
intentions if they feel sad it must be
because somebody else intended to make
them sad if they feel hurt it must be
because somebody else intended to hurt
them they have difficulty understanding
that other people have their own centers
of emotional gravity
therefore when they do something that
when the narcissistic person does
something that hurts somebody else they
have trouble perceiving the harm done
because they don't feel it themselves
further they assume that the other
person intends to make the person with
NPD feel shame or like a bad person when
they attempt to hold them accountable
and this is why people with NPD will
often launch into an extensive defense
of their own character instead of
apologies or attempts to make amends
they can't track the other person's
emotional experience because it's too
different from their own
uh this will often look like minimizing
or even outright denial of the harm that
they did or the consequences of their
actions
second when it comes to accepting
consequences people with NPD and I'm
talking about the personality disordered
range of functioning care often have a
lot of trouble people in the borderline
range that's the personality disordered
range of functioning haven't yet
developed the ability to accept the
immutability of reality they haven't
learned to let go of magical thinking
when it comes to consequences they
um they haven't learned yet necessarily
uh sort of on an unconscious level that
they can't simply wish away harm that
they've caused that they can't avoid
responsibility by simply not thinking
about something and stuff like that
uh and understand that this is a
regressed way of being in the world uh
from this perspective consequences
haven't quite become real yet reality is
written and then erased and Rewritten uh
depending on how the person with the
personality disorder feels at that
particular moment and this is why people
with personality disorders often have
extreme and seemingly inexplicable
shifts in their perceptions of
themselves and others and situations
people operating in this range they tend
to try to undo their bad actions and
they fully expect that it's possible to
make up for hurting or betraying someone
by telling a funny joke or by giving
them a gift or by you know simply acting
as though the argument or the incident
didn't happen in the first place they
may feel shocked or betrayed or even
angry if someone attempts to hold them
accountable for something they did
because in their mind they already sort
of made up for it by being nice
or if they've moved on from the incident
in their mind then they can't understand
how the other person hasn't also moved
on in their mind again the boundary
between self and other is blurry
so gaslighting happens when the person
with NPD does something to hurt someone
else and then minimizes the extent of
the harm or outright denies that the
harm ever happened in the first place
and it can be crazy making for the other
person but from the person with npd's
point of view the harm that was done has
been magically erased in their own mind
due to their inability to cope with
consequences and their inability to sort
of see and consistently respect that
other people have feelings and thoughts
and experiences that are different from
their own Now understand that this is a
developmental deficit we all go through
a phase of development in which we try
to magically undo our bad behavior
or simply erase our memory of it using a
defense called splitting or another one
called denial
these defenses are part of the normal
set of human psychological defense
mechanisms but most people have grown
Beyond them and entered more mature
levels of Personality organization in
which they can hold on to the memory of
harm done appreciate that other people
have the right to deal with their
feelings at their own pace and that if
somebody holds you accountable it isn't
because they're trying to get one over
on you or rub your nose in it or make
you feel like a bad person or dominate
you it's because you actually harmed
them and they would like for you to make
amends now people in the borderline
range of Personality organization don't
necessarily have those abilities or if
they do then they're inconsistent and
this is why someone with NPD will look
you straight in the eye and outright
deny having done something that you know
very well they did they aren't
necessarily consciously trying to
undermine your perception of reality
it's a byproduct of a developmental
delay within their psychology
clear that I'm not excusing this
behavior I'm not saying it's okay I'm
not attempting to erase other people's
experience of having been harmed or
abused or gas lit maybe intentionally by
another person all I'm doing is saying
that it's not necessarily A nefarious or
conscious attempt on the part of the
other person when there's a personality
disorder involved
okay so uh I hope that helps to clear
some things up please feel free to leave
comments or questions below uh and until
next time take good care all right